DATE TO BE DETERMINED

## Introduction
It has been around seven years since the first release!

The project has been 'put away' for several long stretches, and the build system suffered
several disk crashes, other breakages, host movements, requiring a an almost
complete rebuild. Twice. This build is done on a private Jenkins CI system; I'm
also working on a Dockerised system that's public. There are many parts to it, due
to its cross-platform, multi-implementation-language nature.

## Platforms
Second release on all platforms, with notable changes since first release:
* Apple macOS
    * Intel: 'Catalina' 10.15
    * New: Apple Silicon: 'Tahoe' 26
* Linux
    * Ubuntu Linux 24.04 LTS Intel x86-64
    * Raspberry Pi Debian 12
    * Removed: CentOS 7, Ubuntu 16.04 & 18.04, Raspberry Pi Debian Stretch 
* Microsoft Windows
    * Windows 10 22H2
    * (untested on earlier versions e.g. XP, 7, 8, 8.1)
    * Due to lack of compatible TPM hardware, I cannot build on Windows 11 or later.
* Embedded microcontrollers
    * New: Raspberry Pi Pico (cross-compiled on Ubuntu Linux 24.04) - emulator and a USB-Link adapter

## Download
The first release was available from Maven Central. This release changes to use Github Releases, and 
the first release has been added here also. All subsequent releases will be here.

## Contents

* Upgrade to transputer-emulator 0.0.2, with emulator, IServer (host I/O daemon), ‘hello world 2’ example. On Pi Pico, emulator and link adapter.
* Upgrade to transputer-macro-assembler 0.0.2
* New in this release: transputer-eforth 1.2 (unfinished)
* New in this release: transputer-k-r-c-compiler 1.0.1 (unfinished)
* New in this release: The Parachute Book 0.0.2 - the main documentation

## Change Logs
### Emulator
* Converting the NodeServer to be IServer compatible. Similarly, "Hello World"
  (see IServer/client-examples/hello-world-iserver).
* Release for macOS is upgraded from El Capitan to Catalina.
* Release for Intel Linux is now done only on Ubuntu 24.04.
* Release for Raspberry Pi is now done only on Debian 12.
* Release for Windows 10 is now done on Windows 10 22H2.
* Removed versions for older OSs (macOS El Capitan, Ubuntu 16.04, 18.04, CentOS 7.6, Raspbian Stretch).
* IServer -df (full debug) now enables all parts of the debug output.
* Successfully runs hello.asm !
* Added debugging facilities to aid the completion of the eForth Transputer port.
* eForth requires the following facilities of IServer (it originally accessed a UART; these routines have been
  changed to use IServer protocol on Link 0):
    * URD: Read and wait (odd return system)
    * ?RX: Return input character and indication of whether there is any input available
    * TX!: Send output character
    * !IO: Initialise UART
* IServer now supports FPuts and the extended PutChar frame (used by eForth); it
  also supports CommandLine, for use by (e.g.) the Inmos compilers. Any IServer
  arguments that are not understood by IServer can be passed to the transputer on
  request.
* Added a "Hello World" example that uses the macro assembler's primary bootstrap
  include file. (see IServer/client-examples/hello-world-secondary-iserver)
* Added a "Hello World" example that can boot from ROM.
  (see IServer/client-examples/hello-world-iserver-rom)
* IServer is unfinished; it implements the following frame types:
    * Id (Version)
    * Exit
    * Open
    * Read
    * Write
    * Puts (put string with newline to a stream)
    * Get Key
    * Poll Key
    * Close
    * Command Line
* IServer implements the following "extended" frame types, not part of the original IServer, for performance purposes:
    * Put Char (to the console stream)
* Emulator now allows a list of symbols to be loaded; these are displayed when
  disassembling or using the monitor; also enhancements for debugging eForth.
* The emulator's monitor now accepts a 't' command which toggles the display of
  disassembly and memory read/write.
* The emulator can run tests from Mike Brüstle's Transputer Validation Suite.
* Corrected several instruction implementations with guidance from TVS: add,
  adc, bitrevnbits, bitrevword, csngl, cword, div, ladd, ldiff, ldiv, lmul,
  lshl, lshr, lsub, lsum, mul, rem, shl, shr, sub, wcnt, xdble, xword.
* Implemented the instructions from "Transputer Instruction Set - Appendix".
* Added a build for the Raspberry Pi Pico - that can run Hello World booted from a link; that has a single
  core, a single link zero over CDC-USB Serial, and a diagnostics output also over a separate USB CDC port. All
  log calls go out over this port.
  The memory/flash use is quantified.
* Added an asynchronous, bit-banged link implementation for the Pico.
* The IServer has a link that can run over a TTY (Linux/macOS) or COM port (Windows) to connect to a Pi
  Pico emulator.
* Boot protocol executed over any link.
* Bugfix: protocol handler - open file - was inadvertantly broken on some
  platforms.
* Bugfix: A loaded ROM's memory is now initialised/destroyed correctly.

### Assembler
* Upgrade to JDK 17.
* Added the INCLUDE directive to allow separate files to be included in the main assembly file, in lieu of building
  linkable object files.
* Added configurable include search paths.
* Bugfix: Symbols in direct instructions that need to be converged, but that are not defined are now detected and
  cause pass 1 to fail, with the message "Symbol forward references remain unresolved at end of Pass 1 (still
  converging)".
* Changed many diagnostic numeric outputs to hex.
* Added more examples of convergence offset calculation.
* Bugfix: Fix offset generation/start addresses when iterating through convergence. Ensure all parts of the model are
  updated with offset/start location/size information, as storage is adjusted.
* Add the system include directory (e.g. on macOS, /opt/parachute/include/tmasm) to the list of include-paths.
* Add the -s  (--showIncludePaths) command line option to show all the include-paths that have been given, including
  the system include directory.
* Bugfix: ALIGN directive worked for positive addresses, but not negative - Transputer addresses are signed so that if
  the most significant bit is set, the address is negative and precedes any positive address.
* Bugfix: Variables were not being restored to their original contents at the start of a convergence loop, leading to
  variables having values set multiple times leading to incorrect values.
* Bugfix: Attempts to assemble code that overflows the MaxINT address 0x7fffffff is now not allowed. You can assemble
  up to that point, but not beyond.
* Bugfix: Output files were not being truncated to zero size before being written.
* Bugfix: Packaging was created a shaded jar containing all dependencies, and also adding all dependency libraries.
  Having two copies of everything was causing an SLF4J warning of duplicate classes, in addition to being wasteful of
  disk space.

### eForth
* Unfinished, intended for link-booting only at the moment.
* Set to work within a 64KB memory for now, so it loads relatively quickly on a Pi Pico.
* Does not yet complete its cold-boot.
* Converted I/O words to work with the emulator's IServer.

### Small-C
* Unfinished, needs 'stdio' library for IServer protocol.

### Parachute Book
* Intended to be the comprehensive tutorial and reference to the Parachute System.
* Read this after the README-FIRST-parachute.md
